# Find the 3rd Largest in an Unsorted Array

[TOC]

# Problem Description

Given a non-empty array of integers, return the third maximum number in this array.  
If it does not exist, return the minimum number.

>Example 1:  
>Input: [3, 2, 1]  
>Output: 1  
>Explanation: The third maximum is 1.  

>Example 2:  
>Input: [1, 2]  
>Output: 1  
>Explanation: The third maximum does not exist, so the minimum(1) is returned instead.  

>Example 3:  
>Input: [2, 2, 3, 1] 
>Output: 2  
>
>Explanation: Note that the third maximum here means the third maximum number.  
>Both numbers with value 2 are considered as different maximum numbers.  

# Approach I: Use Arrays.sort() function

## Algorithm

A quite obvious solution is to sort this array in a natural order and then output the Kth element from the end.

## Implementation

**Java**

```java
public class KthLargest_Arrays {
	public static int find(int[] nums, int k) {
		int n = Math.min(k, nums.length);
		Arrays.sort(nums);
		return nums[nums.length - n];
	}
}
```

## Unit Test

The following main() is to verify the code.

**Java**

```java
public static void main(String[] args) {
	int k = 3;
	int[] numbers = { 7, 4, 7, 4, 9, 1, 4, 1, 9, 10 };
	System.out.println(find(numbers, k));
}
```

Note: 

* Put this function in the class to do unit test
* The main() could be used to test other solutions as well.

### Test Case

Input: { 7, 4, 7, 4, 9, 1, 4, 1, 9, 10 }
Output: 7

## Complexity

**Time**: $O(log (n))$. Arrays.sort() is a quick sort solution, so the complexity is $O(log n)$.  
**Space**: $O(log(n))$. The Java version of quicksort has a space complexity of O(log n), even in the worst case.

# Approach II: Use PriorityQueue

## Algorithm

- Create a priority queue with size k
- Put the last k elements in the queue as a start
- Continue to iterator this array forward
  - if the current number nums[i] > the head element in this array (which is also the smallest since the priority queue sorted the elements in a natural order)   
  - remove the head element and put this number nums[i] in the queue
- End when it reaches the first element, and the first number in the queue is the result

## Implementation

 **Java**  

```java
public class KthLargest_PriorityQueue {
	public static int find(int[] nums, int k) {
		k = Math.min(nums.length, k);
		PriorityQueue<Integer> queue = new PriorityQueue<>(k);
		int i = nums.length - 1;
		while (k-- > 0) {
			queue.add(nums[i--]);
		}
		while (i-- > 0) {
			if (nums[i] >= queue.peek()) {
				queue.poll();
				queue.add(nums[i]);
			}
		}
		return queue.peek();
	  }
}
```

## Complexity

**Time**: $O(n*log(n))$. Like insertion sort, the worst case if the array is in a descending order when k = length.
**Space**: $O(k)$. Obviously, we need a queue with size k to hold the first largest k elements.

# Approach III: Ultilize quick sort

## Algorithm

Here is the modified quick sort algorithm to solve this problem.

- Take a number in this array (nums[ ]) a pivot number, such as the last number

- Partition nums[] so that the left of which is smaller or equal than the pivot, while the right is bigger

- Switch the position of the pivot number and the partition

  The original problem equals to find the n-th smallest number if n = nums.length - k.

  - When left positon equals n, return nums[left]
  - If left is lesss than n, 

- Continue to do so until every number is processed

So, we could find the Kth largest element earlier during the process before the quick sort completes. 

> Note: Quick sort is in ascending order to the kth largest means the (length-k) smallest

## Implementation

**Java**  

```java
import java.util.Arrays;
public class KthLargest {
	public static int find(int[] nums, int k) {
		if (nums == null || nums.length == 0)
			return Integer.MAX_VALUE;
		return find(nums, 0, nums.length - 1, nums.length - k);
	}

	private static int find(int[] nums, int start, int end, int n) {
		n = Math.min(n, nums.length);
		assert start <= end;
		int pivot = nums[end];
		int left = start;
		for (int i = start; i < end; i++) {
			if (nums[i] <= pivot)
				swap(nums, left++, i);
		}
		swap(nums, left, end);
		if (left == n)
			return nums[left];
		else if (left < n)
			return find(nums, left + 1, end, n);
		else
			return find(nums, start, left - 1, n);
	}

	private static void swap(int[] nums, int i, int j) {
		int tmp = nums[i];
		nums[i] = nums[j];
		nums[j] = tmp;
	}
}
```

## Complexity

**Time**: $O(log (n))$. It is similar to the quick sort.  

**Space**: $O(log(n))$. The resursion of find() consume this level of space since it divide the invoking half each time.

# Follow-up
What if asking for the Kth distinct largest number?
>Example:
>Input: [2, 2, 3, 1]
>Output: 1

>Explanation: Note that the third maximum here means the third maximum distinct number.
>Both numbers with value 2 are both considered as second maximum.

To achieve this, we need to modify the condition when comparing the data with the pivot/guard. This is the solution using PriorityQueue.

**Java**  
```java
import java.util.PriorityQueue;
public class KthDistinctLargest {
	public static int find(int[] nums, int k) {
		k = Math.min(nums.length, k);
		PriorityQueue<Integer> queue = new PriorityQueue<>(k);
		int i = nums.length;
		while (k-- > 0) {
			queue.add(nums[--i]);
		}
		while (--i >= 0) {
			// pass it when the number is already in the queue
			if (!queue.contains(nums[i]) && nums[i] > queue.peek()) {
				queue.poll();
				queue.add(nums[i]);
			}
		}
		return queue.peek();
	}
}
```
# Conclusion

These three implementations have the same level of time complexity $O(n*log(n))$.
